Add bare metal fulfillment enhancement proposal (#7)
innabox/enhancement-proposals: enhancements/bare-metal-fulfillment/README.md

---
title: bare-metal-fulfillment
authors:
  - Tzu-Mainn Chen
creation-date: 2025-09-08
last-updated: 2025-09-08
tracking-link:
  - None
see-also:
  - None
replaces:
  - None
superseded-by:
  - None
---

# Bare Metal Fulfillment

## Summary

> Bare metal fulfillment refers to the process through which a tenant acquires bare metal hosts and configures their networking.

Reviewer: not sure if we want to integrate higher level use cases:
- Some tenants will want to deploy alternative clusters, e.g., SLURM
- We want to support broad use by Red Hat that involves developers installing their own cluster software, own OSes...

* As a tenant, I want to be able to select hosts for a bare metal cluster by resource class.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to view inventory details for my hosts.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to connect to the serial console of my hosts.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to perform basic power control (power on/power off/reset) of my hosts.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to attach hosts to existing networks.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to modify the network connectivity of my hosts by attaching or detaching networks.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to manage connectivity at the interface level in order to support hardware that may have both regular and high performance interfaces (for example, some hosts may have high-bandwidth connectivity for GPU workloads, and it may be necessary to attach specific networks to these interfaces).

### Goals

We will implement bare metal fulfillment in the O-SAC solution, covering the user stories described above. This implementation will
be first deployed and tested in the MOC; as a result, the implementation will rely upon ESI for bare metal management (although

> it will be designed to allow easy replacement of the bare metal management layer).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it will be designed to allow easy replacement of the bare metal management layer). While not addressed in this proposal, a long term goal of bare metal fulfillment is to have it be used as a basis of cluster fulfillment.
```

### Non-Goals

We will not look into alternatives for ESI; that work will be covered through a future enhancement.

We will not substantially modify the existing cluster fulfillment workflow, although we believe bare metal fulfillment should

> eventually be used as the basis of bare metal management within cluster fulfillment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at this time.
```

## Proposal

The implementation of bare metal fulfillment relies on three concepts:

* HostPool: A collection of requested bare metal machines, along with their desired network configuration.
* Host: An ephemeral resource created when bare metal resources are acquired from the underlying bare metal management layer. They represent the assignment of a bare metal resource to a HostPool, and provide an endpoint for host-specific operations.

> * HostClass: Defines a set of bare metal properties, such as memory, CPU, and network interfaces. Each Host has a single HostClass attribute.

Reviewer: should we say specified by the provider?

Author: That's fair - added!

At a high level, tenants will request a HostPool by specifying:

* the number and HostClass of hosts
* the network configuration to be applied to those hosts (note that this configuration applies to each individual host in the HostPool)

The O-SAC solution will assign the requested hosts to the tenant and create matching Host resources for each host. The tenant
can then perform needed operations upon the Host.

We expect bare metal fulfillment to follow the same workflow used for cluster fulfillment; as such, we expect to update the
following existing O-SAC components:

* Fulfillment Service: Define the API for HostPools, Hosts, and HostClasses
* Fulfillment CLI: Give the tenant access to the API

> * Cloudkit Operator: Manage and reconcile the Custom Resources for HostPools and Hosts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* O-SAC Operator: Manage and reconcile the Custom Resources for HostPools and Hosts
```

> * Cloudkit AAP: Use Ansible playbooks to perform the requested reconciliation operations of HostPools and Hosts by calling Bare Metal Management APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* O-SAC AAP: Use Ansible playbooks to perform the requested reconciliation operations of HostPools and Hosts by calling Bare Metal Management APIs.
```

* Bare Metal Management: Manage the hardware; we will use ESI for now

Much of the development work can simply follow the established patterns set by the cluster fulfillment workflow. However, the
following topics merit further discussion in the "Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints" below:

* ESI playbooks
* Serial console support

### Workflow Description

#### Host Pool Creation

1. The tenant uses the Fulfillment CLI to request a HostPool.
2. The O-SAC solution fulfills the request and creates Host resources corresponding to the allocated hosts.

#### Host Pool Network Update

1. The tenant uses the Fulfillment CLI to update the network configuration of a HostPool.
2. The O-SAC solution fulfills the request by updating the network configuration of the hosts in the HostPool.

#### Host Operations

1. The tenant uses the Fulfillment CLI to see their Hosts.
2. The tenant uses the Fulfillment CLI to perform an operation upon the desired Host.

#### Host Pool Deletion

1. The tenant uses the Fulfillment CLI to delete a HostPool.
2. The O-SAC solution fulfills the request and removes the Host resources corresponding to the hosts in the HostPool.

### API Extensions

> 

Reviewer: Should we say how this fits into design, i.e., key features of hosts... are part of the API so operator can validate not changed

Author: I'm not entirely sure what you mean here - do you mean how this proposal fits into the generic O-SAC fulfillment model?

#### HostPools

A tenant requests bare metal resources by creating a HostPool. The following example suggests how we might manage host
selection and network attachment.

>     apiVersion: cloudkit.openshift.io/v1alpha1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    apiVersion: O-SAC.openshift.io/v1alpha1
```

    kind: HostPool
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      hostRequests:
      - resourceClass: fc430
        numberOfHosts: 2

>       # The networkAttachments section controls how networks are connected to

Reviewer: would seperate out examples of different network configurations

      # physical interfaces.
      networkAttachments:
      # This configuration will match any available interface.
      - primary: network1
	    vlans:

> 	    - network2

Reviewer: We need to say here if this is a native or tagged vlan

      # This configuration will only apply to interfaces that match one of the
      # listed MAC addresses (the tenant may not know the MAC address of the hosts until
      # after they have acquired the host).
      - primary: network3
        matches:
          macaddrs:
          - C0:FF:EE:5D:57:7C
          - C0:FF:EE:96:AD:CA

>       # This configuration will only match interfaces with the `25gb` tag

Reviewer: Please don't use word tag here, confusing for people thinking about vlan tags

      - matches:
   	    tag: 25gb
        primary: storage-network

In the simplest case, the requester does not specify explicit network connectivity:

    apiVersion: cloudkit.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: HostPool
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      hostRequests:
      - resourceClass: fc430
        numberOfHosts: 2
      networks:
      - network1
      - storage-network

With no explicit connectivity, all of the specified networks will be connected to available interfaces as access ports. It is an error
if there are more networks than available interfaces.

#### Hosts

Tenants do not create Hosts directly; instead, they are created as part of the HostPool fulfillment workflow. Once created,
tenants can perform host-specific operations:

* Power control
* Serial console access

> * Inventory information

Reviewer: need to be able to release a host

Reviewer: Also, what do we need to do to add a host to a pool?

To support these operations, we propose a new Hosts API. For example, we can implement power control as an attribute on the Host object:

    apiVersion: cloudkit.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: Host
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      powerState: PowerOn
      serialConsole: Enabled

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### ESI Playbooks

The ESI API supports all of the needed bare metal functionality (the cluster fulfillment workflow already relies upon ESI
playbooks for bare metal network configuration) . However, it is important to recognize that O-SAC will not use the ESI concept
of tenancy; from an ESI perspective, hosts will always remain leased to the O-SAC project. As a result, we will need to introduce
a new method of keeping track of O-SAC tenancy.

One solution would be to rely upon Ironic’s extra field, which allows an ESI project to set arbitrary key/value pairs upon a
specified host. Doing so would not be difficult; it simply creates additional considerations when implementing playbooks related
to host assignment and unassignment.

#### Serial Console Support

There are multiple directions we could explore for serial console support:

> * ESI already supports serial console access through socat (using an Ironic feature exposed through an ESI proxy). We could simply

Reviewer: Be good to understand tradeoffs; i.e., could we layer socat on top of other solutions; socat is a pretty generic mechanism.  Is there a consistency advantage to going a different route.

Author: Pulled out a short discussion

Reviewer 2: I think we absolutely want to utilize something that looks a lot like existing streaming interfaces in kubernetes (either the pod exec functionality, or the kubevirt console access).

Author: I'm starting to feel like we may want to pull out console access into a separate enhancement request; I know Adrian's brought up questions relating to console access for VMs which suggest that maybe there's a unified solution we should be designing towards?

would have similar support for serial console access; if not, an alternative generic solution may be preferable.
* We could implement serial console support similar to the pod exec api (https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.23/#execaction-v1-core)

#### Task Groupings

We can perform this implementation in smaller steps:

* HostPool and Host
  * Tenants can create/update/delete HostPools
  * No network attachments
  * Hosts are created when a HostPool is fulfilled
  * Tenants can view their Hosts
  * Tenants have power control on their Hosts
* Network Attachments
  * Tenants can specify network attachments when creating/updating HostPools
  * Requires network service
* Serial Console
  * Tenants can enable/disable serial console on a Host

### Risks and Mitigations

??

### Drawbacks

??

## Alternatives (Not Implemented)

One alternative would be to focus on an ESI replacement before developing the bare metal fulfillment
functionality. However, we anticipate that the MOC will continue to use ESI for now; for that reason,
it makes sense to perform this implementation with ESI in mind, and simply make it easy to replace
ESI when possible.

> 

Reviewer: We are also in conversation with OpenStack folks about possibly fixing ESI

* support for alternative clusters such as SLURM
* support for bare metal configuration during O-SAC cluster fulfillment

In this context, a “tenant” is a person with admin rights to the requested bare metal resources; at the MOC, this person would be
a ColdFront PI or manager.

## Motivation

Bare metal fulfillment is a fundamental requirement for O-SAC, identified as an explicit need for the MOC. It will also serve
as the basis of bare metal configuration for other fulfillment workflows, such as OpenShift cluster fulfillment.

### User Stories

* As a provider, I want to be able to define the available bare metal resource classes.
* As a provider, I want to mark hosts as available for bare metal fulfillment.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to see available bare metal resource classes.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to select hosts for a bare metal cluster by resource class.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to view inventory details for my hosts.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to connect to the serial console of my hosts.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to perform basic power control (power on/power off/reset) of my hosts.

> * As a tenant, I want to be able to attach hosts to existing networks.

Reviewer 3: Maybe too implementation specific, but the user also probably wants to customize the L1 part of the connection, specifically whether to aggregate ports and apply the vlans on the port channel, or on the individual ports.

last-updated: 2025-09-15
tracking-link:
  - None
see-also:
  - None
replaces:
  - None
superseded-by:
  - None
---

# Bare Metal Fulfillment

## Summary

One key component of Virtual Data Center (VDC) fulfillment is the capability to perform bare metal fulfillment. Bare metal
fulfillment refers to the process through which a tenant acquires bare metal hosts and configures their networking.
Afterwards, the tenant will be able to perform selected operations on the host: inventory information, power control, and
serial console access. Any further operations - for example, image-based provisioning - are outside the scope of the O-SAC
solution and must be integrated by the cloud provider.

We believe this feature set is generic enough to support a wide range of initial bare metal cluster use cases, including:

* support for an environment where developers have to flexibility to install their own operating systems and software
* support for alternative clusters such as SLURM
* support for bare metal configuration during O-SAC cluster fulfillment

In this context, a “tenant” is a person with admin rights to the requested bare metal resources; at the MOC, this person would be

> a ColdFront PI or manager.

Author: Good point - updated to specify that the "tenant" is an organization which is represented by a ColdFront PI/manager.

Although this proposal only covers bare metal fulfillment (and not VMs), we believe that developing this bare metal capability
independently will allow us to create a thorough and reliable implementation that can later be used as a solid base for
VDC fulfillment.

## Motivation

Bare metal fulfillment is a fundamental requirement for O-SAC, identified as an explicit need for the MOC. It will also serve
as a component for other fulfillment workflows, such as VDC and OpenShift cluster fulfillment.

### User Stories

* As a provider, I want to be able to define the available bare metal resource classes.
* As a provider, I want to mark hosts as available for bare metal fulfillment.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to see available bare metal resource classes.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to select hosts for a bare metal cluster by resource class.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to view inventory details for my hosts.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to connect to the serial console of my hosts.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to perform basic power control (power on/power off/reset) of my hosts.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to attach hosts to existing networks.

> * As a tenant, I want to be able to modify the network connectivity of my hosts by attaching or detaching networks.

Author: It's not super different I guess! The first is intended to be "network configuration on creation" while the second is "update network configuration".

> * As a tenant, I want to be able to modify the network connectivity of my hosts by attaching or detaching networks.

Reviewer 2: Maybe rephrase them as such?

- As a tenant, I want to be able to specify network attachments for a host when I first acquire it.
- As a tenant, I want to be able to update the network attachments of a host that I have already acquired.

> * As a tenant, I want to be able to modify the network connectivity of my hosts by attaching or detaching networks.

Author: Makes sense! Updated

* Bare Metal Management: Manage the hardware; we will use ESI for now

Much of the development work can simply follow the established patterns set by the cluster fulfillment workflow. However, the
following topics merit further discussion in the "Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints" below:

* ESI playbooks
* Serial console support

### Workflow Description

#### Host Pool Creation

1. The tenant uses the Fulfillment CLI to request a HostPool.
2. The O-SAC solution fulfills the request and creates Host resources corresponding to the allocated hosts.

#### Host Pool Network Update

1. The tenant uses the Fulfillment CLI to update the network configuration of a HostPool.
2. The O-SAC solution fulfills the request by updating the network configuration of the hosts in the HostPool.

#### Host Pool Expansion

1. The tenant uses the Fulfillment CLI to increase the number of requested hosts specified in a HostPool.
2. The O-SAC solution fulfills the request by adding the requested hosts into the HostPool.

#### Host Pool Reduction

1. The tenant uses the Fulfillment CLI to decrease the number of requested hosts specified in a HostPool.

> 2. The O-SAC solution fulfills the request by removing the requested hosts from the HostPool.

Author: I've added an example in the HostPool section below, and mentioned that the HostPool filters can include the idea of excluding specific nodes.

bare metal management implementations.

#### Task Groupings

We can perform this implementation in smaller steps:

* HostPool and Host
  * Tenants can create/update/delete HostPools
  * No network attachments
  * Hosts are created when a HostPool is fulfilled
  * Tenants can view their Hosts
  * Tenants have power control on their Hosts
* Network Attachments
  * Tenants can specify network attachments when creating/updating HostPools
  * Requires network service
* Serial Console
  * Tenants can enable/disable serial console on a Host

### Risks and Mitigations

??

### Drawbacks

??

## Alternatives (Not Implemented)

One alternative would be to focus on an ESI replacement before developing the bare metal fulfillment
functionality. However, we anticipate that the MOC will continue to use ESI for now; for that reason,
it makes sense to perform this implementation with ESI in mind, and simply make it easy to replace
ESI if/when needed. Note that it is also possible that we will continue to use ESI if the issues
pushing us towards a replacement are fixed.

## Open Questions [optional]

> * Do we have consensus that network configuration can only be performed on a HostPool, and not on an individual Host?

Author: Makes sense! That seems to be the overwhelming consensus, so I've removed this bullet point.

#### Host Pool Reduction

1. The tenant uses the Fulfillment CLI to decrease the number of requested hosts specified in a HostPool. If they wish to remove a specific host, they update their filters to include "not host with name X"; otherwise an arbitrary host will be removed.
2. The O-SAC solution fulfills the request by performing a reconciliation and removing the requested hosts from the HostPool.

#### Host Operations

1. The tenant uses the Fulfillment CLI to see their Hosts.
2. The tenant uses the Fulfillment CLI to perform an operation upon the desired Host.

#### Host Pool Deletion

1. The tenant uses the Fulfillment CLI to delete a HostPool.
2. The O-SAC solution fulfills the request and removes the Host resources corresponding to the hosts in the HostPool.

### API Extensions

#### HostPools

A tenant requests bare metal resources by creating a HostPool with a desired specification. Once created, O-SAC
will repeatedly attempt to fulfill the request until the state of the HostPool matches its specification. Tenants
can update a HostPool specification, and the same reconciliation process will perform the needed operations to change
the state of the HostPool.

> In the following example, the tenant is requesting a HostPool with two fc430 hosts. Each host will have `network1` attached

Author: That'll come with the networking service, but I would assume yes!

as a native VLAN on one physical interface; and a trunk port with `network2` as a native VLAN
and `network3` as a tagged VLAN on a second physical interface.

    apiVersion: o-sac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: HostPool
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      hostRequests:
      - resourceClass: fc430
        numberOfHosts: 2

      # The networkAttachments section controls how networks are connected to
      # physical interfaces.
      networkAttachments:
      # This configuration will match any available interface.
      - primary: network1
      - primary: network2
        vlans:

> 	- network3

Author: whoops - fixed!

If the tenant wishes to specify host properties, they can add host filters; for example, this
HostPool specification will require that hosts be located on rack R2:

    apiVersion: o-sac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: HostPool
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      hostRequests:
      - resourceClass: fc430
        numberOfHosts: 2
	filters:
	- rack: R2

      # The networkAttachments section controls how networks are connected to
      # physical interfaces.
      networkAttachments:
      # This configuration will match any available interface.
      - primary: network1
      - primary: network2
        vlans:

> 	- network3

Author: fixed as well

If they wish to remove a specific host from their HostPool, they can update their
HostPool specification to reduce the number of hosts and exclude that host by name:

    apiVersion: o-sac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: HostPool
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      hostRequests:
      - resourceClass: fc430
        numberOfHosts: 1
	filters:
	- rack: R2

> 	  exclude: HostX

Reviewer 4: oh good point!

> 	  exclude: HostX

Author: fair - added some text!

      # The networkAttachments section controls how networks are connected to
      # physical interfaces.
      networkAttachments:
      # This configuration will match any available interface.
      - primary: network1
      - primary: network2
        vlans:
	- network3

Tenants can also attach networks to interfaces matching a specific property. In this example,
each fc430 will be configured with `network1` attached to any available physical interface,
while `storage-network` will only be attached to an interface with the `25gb` property.

    apiVersion: o-sac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: HostPool
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      hostRequests:
      - resourceClass: fc430
        numberOfHosts: 2

      # The networkAttachments section controls how networks are connected to
      # physical interfaces.
      networkAttachments:
      # This configuration will match any available interface.
      - primary: network1
      # This configuration will only match interfaces with the `25gb` property
      - matches:
   	    property: 25gb
        primary: storage-network

> 

Author: fixed

#### Hosts

Tenants do not create Hosts directly; instead, they are created as part of the HostPool fulfillment workflow. Once created,
tenants can perform host-specific operations:

* Power control
* Serial console access
* Inventory information

To support these operations, we propose a new Hosts API. For example, we can implement power control as an attribute on the Host object:

    apiVersion: cloudkit.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: Host
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      powerState: PowerOn

>       serialConsole: Enabled

Author: The Ironic implementation of a serial console had resource issues, so we'd encourage users to shut it off when unneeded. The base Ironic implementation also had security issues until we implemented a proxy. It's possible that with the correct solution, we might be able to keep it always on... ?

>       serialConsole: Enabled

Reviewer 4: Can we enabled the console only when users ask for it?

>       serialConsole: Enabled

Author: The way it works with ESI is that the user calls an API to enable the console, and the ESI service returns a URL that they can use with websocat. If we go down that route I imagine we'd do something similar; however it's not clear that we do want to go down that route, which is why this is kinda vague.

Honestly, I wouldn't mind removing serial console from this and putting it into a future enhancement proposal; as you mention, it's something that VMs want as well so there may be broader design required.

>       serialConsole: Enabled

Reviewer 4: you're right, on VM side, we need to have 'something' (the fulfillment-service?) to serve VM's serial console, that way we don't expose the HUB/VM cluster directly to the user.

>       serialConsole: Enabled

Reviewer 2: I like @adriengentil's suggestion of removing this from the spec. When a user requests serial console access, our solution should do whatever is necessary on the backend to enable that -- in the case of ESI, that would mean first enabling the serial console.

> 

Author: done!

playbooks for bare metal network configuration) . However, it is important to recognize that O-SAC will not use the ESI concept
of tenancy; from an ESI perspective, hosts will always remain leased to the O-SAC project. As a result, we will need to introduce
a new method of keeping track of O-SAC tenancy.

One solution would be to rely upon Ironic’s extra field, which allows an ESI project to set arbitrary key/value pairs upon a
specified host. Doing so would not be difficult; it simply creates additional considerations when implementing playbooks related
to host assignment and unassignment.

#### Serial Console Support

There are multiple directions we could explore for serial console support:

* ESI already supports serial console access through socat (using an Ironic feature exposed through an ESI proxy). We could simply
generate the direct console URL and store that in the resource status.
* We could implement serial console support similar to the pod exec api (https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.23/#execaction-v1-core)

The first solution has the advantage of already being implemented within ESI; all we have to do is expose the URL generated by

> ESI. However, it is unknown whether other bare metal services would have similar support for serial console access; for that

Reviewer 4: answered in a previous comment

---
title: bare-metal-fulfillment
authors:
  - Tzu-Mainn Chen
creation-date: 2025-09-08
last-updated: 2025-09-15
tracking-link:
  - None
see-also:
  - None
replaces:
  - None
superseded-by:
  - None
---

# Bare Metal Fulfillment

## Summary

One key component of Virtual Data Center (VDC) fulfillment is the capability to perform bare metal fulfillment. Bare metal
fulfillment refers to the process through which a tenant acquires bare metal hosts and configures their networking.
Afterwards, the tenant will be able to perform selected operations on the host: inventory information, power control, and
serial console access. Any further operations - for example, image-based provisioning - are outside the scope of the O-SAC

> solution and must be integrated by the cloud provider.

Reviewer 2: In our "virtual data center" model, we've discussed how one potential solution to provisioning would be to create virtual machine with your favorite provisioning tools and then attach to the same network as your bare metal hosts. Maybe we don't need to call that out here as an option, but what about:

```suggestion
solution and must be provided by the tenant or integrated by the cloud provider.
```

We believe this feature set is generic enough to support a wide range of initial bare metal cluster use cases, including:

* support for an environment where developers have to flexibility to install their own operating systems and software
* support for alternative clusters such as SLURM
* support for bare metal configuration during O-SAC cluster fulfillment

In this context, a “tenant” is an organization with admin rights to the requested bare metal resources; at the MOC, a tenant

> would be led by a ColdFront PI or manager.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this information is useful. Here we're only trying to define "what is a tenant?"; I don't think we care about who "leads" a tenant unless that impacts our permissions model.

Author: I think it does provide some MOC-specific context that may be useful for MOC staff? I don't feel super strongly either way.

Although this proposal only covers bare metal fulfillment (and not VMs), we believe that developing this bare metal capability
independently will allow us to create a thorough and reliable implementation that can later be used as a solid base for

> VDC fulfillment.

Reviewer 2: Always Define Your Acronyms (ADYA):

```suggestion
Virtual Datacenter (VDC) fulfillment.
```

## Motivation

> Bare metal fulfillment is a fundamental requirement for O-SAC, identified as an explicit need for the MOC. It will also serve
> as a component for other fulfillment workflows, such as VDC and OpenShift cluster fulfillment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bare metal fulfillment is a fundamental requirement for O-SAC. It has been identified as an explicit need for the MOC. It will also serve
as a component for other fulfillment workflows, such as VDC and OpenShift cluster fulfillment.
```

### User Stories

* As a provider, I want to be able to define the available bare metal resource classes.
* As a provider, I want to mark hosts as available for bare metal fulfillment.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to see available bare metal resource classes.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to select hosts for a bare metal cluster by resource class and other possible filters (such as rack location).

> * As a tenant, I want to be able to increase or decrease the hosts for an existing bare metal cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* As a tenant, I want to be able to add hosts to or remove hosts from an existing baremetal cluster.```

* As a tenant, I want to be able to view inventory details for my hosts.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to connect to the serial console of my hosts.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to perform basic power control (power on/power off/reset) of my hosts.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to attach hosts to existing networks.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to modify the network connectivity of my hosts by attaching or detaching networks.
* As a tenant, I want to be able to manage connectivity at the interface level in order to support hardware that may have both regular and high performance interfaces (for example, some hosts may have high-bandwidth connectivity for GPU workloads, and it may be necessary to attach specific networks to these interfaces).

### Goals

We will implement bare metal fulfillment in the O-SAC solution, covering the user stories described above. This implementation will
be first deployed and tested in the MOC; as a result, the implementation will rely upon ESI for bare metal management (although

> it will be designed to allow easy replacement of the bare metal management layer). While not addressed in this proposal, a long term goal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it will be designed to allow replacement of the bare metal management layer). While not addressed in this proposal, a long term goal
```

> of bare metal fulfillment is to have it be used as the basis of bare metal configuration during cluster fulfillment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of bare metal fulfillment is to use it as the mechanism by which we acquire bare metal hosts during cluster fulfillment.
```

### Non-Goals

We will not look into alternatives for ESI; that work will be covered through a future enhancement.

We will not substantially modify the existing cluster fulfillment workflow at this time.

## Proposal

The implementation of bare metal fulfillment relies on three concepts:

> * HostPool: A collection of requested bare metal machines, along with their desired network configuration.

Reviewer 2: I know we show examples later on, but we should state explicitly here whether a hostclass is a collection of homogeneous hosts (i.e., all one resource class) or a heterogeneous collection of hosts (multiple resource classes).

the state of the HostPool.

In the following example, the tenant is requesting a HostPool with two fc430 hosts. Each host will have `network1` attached
as a native VLAN on one physical interface; and a trunk port with `network2` as a native VLAN
and `network3` as a tagged VLAN on a second physical interface.

    apiVersion: o-sac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: HostPool
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      hostRequests:
      - resourceClass: fc430
        numberOfHosts: 2

      # The networkAttachments section controls how networks are connected to
      # physical interfaces.
      networkAttachments:
      # This configuration will match any available interface.
      - primary: network1
      - primary: network2
        vlans:
        - network3

If the tenant wishes to specify host properties, they can filter hosts by specifying hostSelectors; for example, this
HostPool specification will require that hosts be located on rack R2:

    apiVersion: o-sac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: HostPool
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      hostRequests:
      - resourceClass: fc430
        numberOfHosts: 2

> 	hostSelectors:
> 	- rack: R2

Reviewer 2: We probably want to support the standard Kubernetes `matchLabels` and `matchExpression` syntaxes here, so this would look something like:

```suggestion
	hostSelectors:
	  matchLabels:
        row: R2
      matchExpressions:
      - key: cabinet
        op: NotIn
        value: ["C3"]
```

That says, "must be in row R2 but must not be in cabinet C3".

      # The networkAttachments section controls how networks are connected to
      # physical interfaces.
      networkAttachments:
      # This configuration will match any available interface.
      - primary: network1
      - primary: network2
        vlans:
        - network3

If they wish to remove a specific host from their HostPool, they can update their
HostPool specification to reduce the number of hosts and exclude that host by name;
this prevents the reconciliation loop from simply re-adding the host later. Note
that this also allows for a tenant to replace a host by keeping the number of
hosts constant while also excluding the unwanted host.

    apiVersion: o-sac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: HostPool
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      hostRequests:
      - resourceClass: fc430
        numberOfHosts: 1

> 	hostSelectors:
> 	- rack: R2
> 	  exclude:
> 	  - HostX

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	hostSelectors:
    matchLabels:
      cabinet: R2
    matchExpressions:
    - op: NotIn
      key: nodeName
      value: ["HostX"]
```

      # The networkAttachments section controls how networks are connected to
      # physical interfaces.
      networkAttachments:
      # This configuration will match any available interface.
      - primary: network1
      - primary: network2
        vlans:

> 	- network3

Reviewer 2: This is mis-indented. I think there are some tabs-vs-spaces issues happening in this document; you should detab it.

We can perform this implementation in smaller steps:

* HostPool and Host
  * Tenants can create/update/delete HostPools
  * No network attachments
  * Hosts are created when a HostPool is fulfilled
  * Tenants can view their Hosts
  * Tenants have power control on their Hosts
* Implement HostPool hostSelectors
  * filter by name (to support removal of specific hosts from a HostPool)
  * filter by rack
  * affinity/anti-affinity
* Network Attachments
  * Tenants can specify network attachments when creating/updating HostPools
  * Requires network service
* Serial Console
  * Tenants can enable/disable serial console on a Host

### Risks and Mitigations

??

### Drawbacks

??

## Alternatives (Not Implemented)

One alternative would be to focus on an ESI replacement before developing the bare metal fulfillment
functionality. However, we anticipate that the MOC will continue to use ESI for now; for that reason,
it makes sense to perform this implementation with ESI in mind, and simply make it easy to replace
ESI if/when needed. Note that it is also possible that we will continue to use ESI if the issues
pushing us towards a replacement are fixed.

## Open Questions [optional]

> * Can we remove network attachment by MAC address?

Reviewer 2: Should we remove this?

> 

Reviewer 2: What about attaching the same network to multiple interfaces? Supported? Not supported?

the state of the HostPool.

In the following example, the tenant is requesting a HostPool with two fc430 hosts. Each host will have `network1` attached
as a native VLAN on one physical interface; and a trunk port with `network2` as a native VLAN
and `network3` as a tagged VLAN on a second physical interface.

    apiVersion: o-sac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: HostPool
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      hostRequests:
      - resourceClass: fc430
        numberOfHosts: 2

      # The networkAttachments section controls how networks are connected to
      # physical interfaces.
      networkAttachments:
      # This configuration will match any available interface.
      - primary: network1
      - primary: network2
        vlans:
        - network3

If the tenant wishes to specify host properties, they can filter hosts by specifying hostSelectors; for example, this
HostPool specification will require that hosts be located on rack R2:

    apiVersion: o-sac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: HostPool
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      hostRequests:
      - resourceClass: fc430
        numberOfHosts: 2

> 	hostSelectors:
> 	- rack: R2

Reviewer 2: We probably want to support standard Kubernetes `matchLabel`/`matchExpression` syntax in these selectors. Maybe something like this:

```suggestion
	hostSelectors:
    matchLabels:
      row: R2
    matchExpressions:
    - op: NotIn
      key: cabinet
      values: ["C2"]
```

Author: makes sense! updated (and added text before the example)

      # The networkAttachments section controls how networks are connected to
      # physical interfaces.
      networkAttachments:
      # This configuration will match any available interface.
      - primary: network1
      - primary: network2
        vlans:
        - network3

If they wish to remove a specific host from their HostPool, they can update their
HostPool specification to reduce the number of hosts and exclude that host by name;
this prevents the reconciliation loop from simply re-adding the host later. Note
that this also allows for a tenant to replace a host by keeping the number of
hosts constant while also excluding the unwanted host.

    apiVersion: o-sac.openshift.io/v1alpha1
    kind: HostPool
    metadata:
      name: example
    spec:
      hostRequests:
      - resourceClass: fc430
        numberOfHosts: 1

> 	hostSelectors:
> 	- rack: R2
> 	  exclude:
> 	  - HostX

Reviewer 2: Per my earlier comment:

```suggestion
	hostSelectors:
    matchLabels:
      row: R2
    matchExpressions:
      - op: NotIn
        key: nodeName
        values: ["HostX"]
```
